---
layout: default
title:  "Postgres 101"
date:   2017-11-05
categories: postgres guide
---

This is a super simple runthrough of how to get postgres up and running. The end goal of this and the next post will be: gain the ability to stand up cheap and easy postgres dbs for rapid prototyping when noodling around with app ideas.

Postgres is Organized like this:
---
  * *Server:* configured to point at a database cluster, manages concurrent client connections to databases
  * *Client(s):* Anything that speaks to the database essentially.


 When installing:
---
* Be lazy like me and use homebrew (macOs) or apt-get or yum or whatever to install.
* You *should* create a user (on the OS side) to control all data (i.e. a user named "postgres").



By default there are generally two databases in the cluster: A 'Postgres' database and a 'Template1' database. Just leave them alone.

Before you start your postgres server for the first time you have to create the actual cluster.

> *From the docs:*
> In file system terms, a database cluster is a single directory under which all data will be stored.

To create a cluster:
`initdb -D /usr/local/pgsql/data`

Once you've told postgres where to put all its data, you can point it at the data directly when you run it like this:
`postgres -D /usr/local/pgsql/data`

The docs also recommend this for logging stdin/out and running in the background:
`postgres -D /usr/local/pgsql/data >logfile 2>&1 &`

Once you have the db running you can create a db with this:
`createdb myDatabase`

And drop it with this:
`dropdb myDatabase`

connect to your new DB with this:
`psql myDatabase`

Check out what you can do (once connected) with this:
`\h`

Quit the cli with this:
`\q`

Just use pgAdmin though.

---

In summary:
---
When you're running postgres you're actually:
* Starting up a piece of software (the server).
* Pointing that software at a directory (the cluster).
* Creating databases in that directory.
* Connecting to the server with a client and querying, persisting, updating the data in a database.

Important to note:
---
* You can have multiple databases in a single cluster.
* You can have multiple clusters on your filesystem.
* Users in the database are different than users on your operating system
* pgAdmin is a *client* to your (or any) postgres server.

Check the [docs](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/10/static/index.html).
Check out [pgAdmin](https://www.pgadmin.org/).
